# Drizzle Express Guide

This guide covers the usage details of Drizzle Express.

## Scaffold

A scaffold, in Drizzle Express, is all of the starter code, including the routes, controller, service, and schema, that is required to have a fully functional CRUD API.

After the initial configuration is completed from running the `init` command, you can create full stack scaffolding with the `scaffold` command.

The `-c` option takes a space-separated string of column configurations in the following format: `column_name:dataType`. The data types map directly to most of the available data types in Drizzle ORM. See [Data Types](/drizzle-next/guide.html#data-types) for a list of supported data types.

The `id`, `created_at`, and `updated_at` fields are automatically generated by Drizzle Express, and should be omitted from the command.

After scaffolding, you can review the schema and make any necessary changes before running the database migrations.

Example:

```bash
npx drizzle-express@latest scaffold products -c title:text price:integer description:text
```

## Data Types

See [Data Types](/drizzle-next/guide.html#data-types).

## Primary key strategy

See [Primary key strategy](/drizzle-next/guide.html#primary-key-strategy).

## Foreign key constraints

Drizzle Express supports adding foreign key constraints using the following special `references` data type.

For example, a one to many relationship where a post belongs to a category can be set up using the following scaffolds.

First, scaffold the `one` side of the relationship.

```bash
npx drizzle-express@latest scaffold category -c title:text
```

Second, scaffold the `many` side of the relationship:

```bash
npx drizzle-next@latest scaffold post -c category_id:references title:text
```

## Project structure

Drizzle Express uses the following project structure:

```text
- drizzle
- scripts
- src
  - config
  - controllers
  - middlewares
  - routes
  - schema
  - services
```
