# About

## Philosophy

### Technology curation

Many decisions happen at the beginnings of projects. A developer must decide on: a web framework, a database, UI component library, object relational mapper (ORM), CSS framework, authentication solution, validation library, payment solution, and other technologies relevant to the project. This can be time consuming and lead to decision fatigue. In the JavaScript world, this is known as JavaScript fatigue. It is a phenomenon describing the overwhelming array of technology choices in the JavaScript ecosystem. drizzle-next offers a preferred list of technologies to be used as a foundation for web app projects.

### Configuration automation

Once the technologies are decided on, the next step is to wire everything together such that the application works as a cohesive whole. This means making sure the database connection is working, the UI component library is installed, and that integrations with external services are working.

Developers will often use libraries to add capabilities such as authentication, authorization, and data validations. However, setting these up can be time consuming. drizzle-next provides an `init` command which allows you to choose from a short menu of features that you can add to your Next.js app. drizzle-next will write all the code necessary for the selected features.

By having a simple working example, you'll save time not having to build it entirely from scratch. You can customize the generated code to fit your project requirements. Additionally, drizzle-next will display a checklist of tasks to complete the initial configuration. The `init` command is intended to be run once at the beginning of a new project.

### Scaffold automation

Once the technologies are selected and configured, the next step is to begin building the interesting parts of the app. Typically, this involves a number of tasks including creating the database tables, API endpoints or server actions, user interface, layouts, pages, and web forms. This process may involve referencing documentation and writing the "boilerplate" code that the rest of the app will be built upon. This too is a time consuming process.

drizzle-next provides a `scaffold` command to automate the entire process of setting up the initial "boilerplate" code. You only have to provide the table name along with the columns and data types. drizzle-next will generate the database migration files, back end code, and front end code for the provided database schema.

What is the purpose of the scaffolded code? It is to provide a fully working full stack Create Read Update Delete (CRUD) feature that you can use as a reference to build the rest of your app. The `scaffold` command is intended to be run as many times as you need to generate full stack scaffolding. This automation is heavily inspired by the Ruby on Rails scaffold command.

## Technologies and Inspirations

### Next.js

Many of the full stack patterns used in drizzle-next are based on the official Next.js documentation. Next.js provides many conveniences out of the box, such as file system routing, server side rendering, code bundling, and more.

### shadcn/ui

shadcn/ui is the tool that copies and pastes beautifully styled components into your projects. Similarly, drizzle-next generates full stack components into your Next.js project. You have full control of the code that is generated instead of the code being hidden behind an external package.

### Drizzle ORM

A Headless TypeScript ORM that provides both SQL-like and relational queries, as well as schema generation and database migrations. If you know SQL, you know Drizzle. If you prefer an ORM, you can use their query API. Drizzle always outputs 1 query.

### TypeScript

TypeScript adds additional syntax for types to JavaScript. This enables the early catching of errors in your editor and at compile time.

### TailwindCSS

TailwindCSS is a CSS framework which provides reusable utility classes. TailwindCSS simplifies and improves scalability of styling by coupling markup with style.

### Auth.js

drizzle-next favors proven, open-source solutions that let you maintain control over your data. Similarly, with drizzle-next, you own not only your data but also your code.

### Zod

drizzle-next uses `zod` and `drizzle-zod` for data validations. Each server action that is generated by the scaffolding tool will also contain zod validations to check for the correctness of data being submitted. Zod also provides tools for the parsing of form data.

### Ruby on Rails

Nostalgia for Ruby on Rails style development is one motivation that led to the creation of drizzle-next. The `drizzle-next scaffold` command was modeled after the `rails scaffold` command. With a predefined set of conventions, you'll spend less time configuring things, and more time building.

### Django

Django has a built-in admin interface as part of the core framework. It works out of the box with your custom data models. This was the main inspiration for the auth and admin dashboard of drizzle-next.

### WordPress

The content management dashboard of WordPress was also an inspiration for the design of the drizzle-next dashboard.
